GEOMESA-3591 Added Trino backend support for GeoMesa (#3573)
locationtech/geomesa: docs/user/trino/design.rst

.. _trino_design:

Trino Data Store Design
=======================

Architecture
------------

.. code-block:: text

    ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
    │  Trino cluster (481+)                                                   │
    │                                                                         │
    │  catalog: iceberg          catalog: spatial_iceberg                     │
    │  (stock Iceberg connector) (SpatialConnector wrapping Iceberg)         │
    │                             └── SpatialConnectorMetadata                │
    │                                  applyFilter() → bbox + Z2 TupleDomain  │
    │                                                                         │
    │  CQL clients ──► geomesa-trino-datastore ──► TrinoFilterToSQL           │

>     │                  (CQL filter ──► bbox-overlap + CASE WHEN shortcut SQL) │

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    │  Trino cluster (481+)                                                  │
    │                                                                        │
    │  catalog: iceberg          catalog: spatial_iceberg                    │
    │  (stock Iceberg connector) (SpatialConnector wrapping Iceberg)         │
    │                             └── SpatialConnectorMetadata               │
    │                                  applyFilter() → bbox + Z2 TupleDomain │
    │                                                                        │
    │  CQL clients ──► geomesa-trino-datastore ──► TrinoFilterToSQL          │
    │                 (CQL filter ──► bbox-overlap + CASE WHEN shortcut SQL) │
```
this box is a little mis-aligned

* ``spatial_iceberg`` — wrapper that intercepts ``applyFilter()`` to inject
  TupleDomain constraints on the ``__<geom>_bbox__`` struct sub-fields **and** a
  ``SortedRangeSet`` over ``__<geom>_z2__`` partition values. Iceberg uses both for
  manifest-list and per-file pruning at scan-planning time.

How the Three Pruning Layers Compose
------------------------------------

Layer 1: Z2/XZ2 Partition Pruning (Truncate-String Manifest Pruning)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Tables are ``truncate(N_chars)``-partitioned on ``__<geom>_z2__`` (or ``__<geom>_xz2__``
for non-point datasets, where ``<geom>`` is the geometry column's name — see
:ref:`trino_companion_columns`), a VARCHAR holding the 16-char zero-padded lowercase
unsigned hex of the upstream GeoMesa SFC index. For Z2, the index is
``Z2SFC.index(lon, lat) << 2`` — a left-shift by 2 to rotate the lat/lon
hemisphere bits up into the top hex char (Z2SFC reserves bits 62 and 63,
so the shift wastes nothing). At ``N_chars = 1`` the 16 possible partition
values map to a 4×4 grid of hemispheric quadrants; CONUS occupies 4 of

> them. For XZ2, the index is ``XZ2SFC(g=12).index(envelope)`` with no shift

Reviewer: ```suggestion
values map to a 4×4 grid of hemispheric quadrants. For XZ2, the index is
``XZ2SFC(g=12).index(envelope)`` with no shift
```
i'd leave out the CONUS ref here

column. For example, a track-observation table with a ``location`` column (point
geometries) and a ``path`` column (linestring geometries) would have:

.. code-block:: text

    location   VARBINARY   ─┬─ __location_z2__    VARCHAR (partition column)
                            └─ __location_bbox__  ROW(xmin, ymin, xmax, ymax)
    path       VARBINARY   ─┬─ __path_xz2__       VARCHAR (partition column)
                            └─ __path_bbox__      ROW(xmin, ymin, xmax, ymax)

The connector discovers each group independently and prunes on whichever geometry
column(s) a query filters against.

.. _trino_schema:

Table Schema
------------

Tables are truncate-partitioned on their spatial-index companion columns
(``__<geom>_z2__`` or ``__<geom>_xz2__``; VARCHAR hex column, ``truncate(N_chars)``),
and where applicable on ``month(dtg)`` or ``year(dtg)``. The Z2 bit resolution is
per-table; see :ref:`trino_partitioning`.

Common columns across all spatial tables, shown for a single geometry column
named ``geom``:

.. list-table::
    :header-rows: 1
    :widths: 20 25 55

    * - Column
      - Type
      - Notes
    * - ``__fid__``
      - VARCHAR (required)

>       - feature id; hidden from ``SELECT *``

Reviewer: is this accurate? probably doesn't matter too much (and I assume it gets mapped through in the datastore), but we probably want to return fid (but hide vis) in a select *

(the reason we encode it with `__fid__` is to avoid any conflicts with user-specified attribute columns, which are allowed to be named things like `id` of `fid`)

Author: No, this is out-of-date from several weeks ago that got carried through-  we do not explicitly hide any of the companion columns.  If we 'wanted' to earmark certain columns for exclusion, we could, that would be a small feature-enhancement to the plugin connector.
